<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="appendix" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appendix</h2>
			<p>As perhaps I have no right to expect from a Reader of an Introduction to a volume of Poems that attentive perusal without which it is impossible, imperfectly as I have been compelled to express my meaning, that what I have said in the Preface should throughout be fully understood, I am the more anxious to give an exact notion of the sense in which I use the phrase <i>poetic diction</i>; and for this purpose I will here add a few words concerning the origin of the phraseology which I have condemned under that name.⁠—The earliest Poets of all nations generally wrote from passion excited by real events; they wrote naturally, and as men: feeling powerfully as they did, their language was daring, and figurative. In succeeding times, Poets, and men ambitious of the fame of Poets, perceiving the influence of such language, and desirous of producing the same effect, without having the same animating passion, set themselves to a mechanical adoption of those figures of speech, and made use of them, sometimes with propriety, but much more frequently applied them to feelings and ideas with which they had no natural connection whatsoever. A language was thus insensibly produced, differing materially from the real language of men in <em>any situation</em>. The Reader or Hearer of this distorted language found himself in a perturbed and unusual state of mind: when affected by the genuine language of passion he had been in a perturbed and unusual state of mind also: in both cases he was willing that his common judgment and understanding should be laid asleep, and he had no instinctive and infallible perception of the true to make him reject the false; the one served as a passport for the other. The agitation and confusion of mind were in both cases delightful, and no wonder if he confounded the one with the other, and believed them both to be produced by the same, or similar causes. Besides, the Poet spake to him in the character of a man to be looked up to, a man of genius and authority. Thus, and from a variety of other causes, this distorted language was received with admiration; and Poets, it is probable, who had before contented themselves for the most part with misapplying only expressions which at first had been dictated by real passion, carried the abuse still further, and introduced phrases composed apparently in the spirit of the original figurative language of passion, yet altogether of their own invention, and distinguished by various degrees of wanton deviation from good sense and nature.</p>
			<p>It is indeed true that the language of the earliest Poets was felt to differ materially from ordinary language, because it was the language of extraordinary occasions; but it was really spoken by men, language which the Poet himself had uttered when he had been affected by the events which he described, or which he had heard uttered by those around him. To this language it is probable that metre of some sort or other was early superadded. This separated the genuine language of Poetry still further from common life, so that whoever read or heard the poems of these earliest Poets felt himself moved in a way in which he had not been accustomed to be moved in real life, and by causes manifestly different from those which acted upon him in real life. This was the great temptation to all the corruptions which have followed: under the protection of this feeling succeeding Poets constructed a phraseology which had one thing, it is true, in common with the genuine language of poetry, namely, that it was not heard in ordinary conversation; that it was unusual. But the first Poets, as I have said, spake a language which, though unusual, was still the language of men. This circumstance, however, was disregarded by their successors; they found that they could please by easier means: they became proud of a language which they themselves had invented, and which was uttered only by themselves; and, with the spirit of a fraternity, they arrogated it to themselves as their own. In process of time metre became a symbol or promise of this unusual language, and whoever took upon him to write in metre, according as he possessed more or less of true poetic genius, introduced less or more of this adulterated phraseology into his compositions, and the true and the false became so inseparably interwoven that the taste of men was gradually perverted; and this language was received as a natural language; and at length, by the influence of books upon men, did to a certain degree really become so. Abuses of this kind were imported from one nation to another, and with the progress of refinement this diction became daily more and more corrupt, thrusting out of sight the plain humanities of nature by a motley masquerade of tricks, quaintnesses, hieroglyphics, and enigmas.</p>
			<p>It would be highly interesting to point out the causes of the pleasure given by this extravagant and absurd language: but this is not the place; it depends upon a great variety of causes, but upon none perhaps more than its influence in impressing a notion of the peculiarity and exaltation of the Poet’s character, and in flattering the Reader’s self-love by bringing him nearer to a sympathy with that character; an effect which is accomplished by unsettling ordinary habits of thinking, and thus assisting the Reader to approach to that perturbed and dizzy state of mind in which if he does not find himself, he imagines that he is <em>balked</em> of a peculiar enjoyment which poetry can, and ought to bestow.</p>
			<p>The sonnet which I have quoted from Gray, in the Preface, except the lines printed in Italics, consists of little else but this diction, though not of the worst kind; and indeed, if I may be permitted to say so, it is far too common in the best writers, both antient and modern. Perhaps I can in no way, by positive example, more easily give my Reader a notion of what I mean by the phrase <i>poetic diction</i> than by referring him to a comparison between the metrical paraphrases which we have of passages in the old and new Testament, and those passages as they exist in our common Translation. See Pope’s “Messiah” throughout, Prior’s “Did sweeter sounds adorn my flowing tongue,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> “Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> See 1st Corinthians, chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>th. By way of immediate example, take the following of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Turn on the prudent Ant thy heedless eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Observe her labours, Sluggard, and be wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No stern command, no monitory voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prescribes her duties, or directs her choice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, timely provident, she hastes away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To snatch the blessings of a plenteous day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When fruitful Summer loads the teeming plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She crops the harvest and she stores the grain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How long shall sloth usurp thy useless hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnerve thy vigour, and enchain thy powers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While artful shades thy downy couch enclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soft solicitation courts repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst the drowsy charms of dull delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Year chases year with unremitted flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till want now following, fraudulent and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall spring to seize thee, like an ambushed foe.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>From this hubbub of words pass to the original. <q>“Go to the Ant, thou Sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise: which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest. How long wilt thou sleep, O Sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. So shall thy poverty come as one that travaileth, and thy want as an armed man.”</q> Proverbs, chap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>th.</p>
			<p>One more quotation and I have done. It is from Cowper’s verses supposed to be written by Alexander Selkirk:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Religion! What treasure untold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resides in that heavenly word!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More precious than silver and gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or all that this earth can afford.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the sound of the church-going bell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These valleys and rocks never heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er sighed at the sound of a knell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or smiled when a sabbath appeared.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye winds, that have made me your sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convey to this desolate shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some cordial endearing report</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a land I must visit no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Friends, do they now and then send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wish or a thought after me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O tell me I yet have a friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though a friend I am never to see.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I have quoted this passage as an instance of three different styles of composition. The first four lines are poorly expressed; some Critics would call the language prosaic; the fact is, it would be bad prose, so bad, that it is scarcely worse in metre. The epithet “church-going” applied to a bell, and that by so chaste a writer as Cowper, is an instance of the strange abuses which Poets have introduced into their language till they and their Readers take them as matters of course, if they do not single them out expressly as objects of admiration. The two lines “Ne’er sigh’d at the sound,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> are, in my opinion, an instance of the language of passion wrested from its proper use, and, from the mere circumstance of the composition being in metre, applied upon an occasion that does not justify such violent expressions; and I should condemn the passage, though perhaps few Readers will agree with me, as vicious poetic diction. The last stanza is throughout admirably expressed: it would be equally good whether in prose or verse, except that the Reader has an exquisite pleasure in seeing such natural language so naturally connected with metre. The beauty of this stanza tempts me here to add a sentiment which ought to be the pervading spirit of a system, detached parts of which have been imperfectly explained in the Preface⁠—namely, that in proportion as ideas and feelings are valuable, whether the composition be in prose or in verse, they require and exact one and the same language.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
