<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Volume 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="volume-1" epub:type="volume">
			<h3 epub:type="title">Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
			<article id="expostulation-and-reply" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">Expostulation and Reply</h4>
				<p>
					<span>“Why, William, on that old gray stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thus for the length of half a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why, William, sit you thus alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And dream your time away?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Where are your books?⁠—that light bequeath’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To beings else forlorn and blind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Up! up! and drink the spirit breath’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“From dead men to their kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“You look round on your mother earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“As if she for no purpose bore you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“As if you were her first-born birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And none had lived before you!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One morning thus, by Esthwaite lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When life was sweet, I knew not why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me my good friend Matthew spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus I made reply:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The eye it cannot choose but see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“We cannot bid the ear be still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Our bodies feel, where’er they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Against, or with our will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nor less I deem that there are powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Which of themselves our minds impress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That we can feed this mind of ours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In a wise passiveness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Think you, mid all this mighty sum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Of things for ever speaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That nothing of itself will come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But we must still be seeking?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“⁠—Then ask not wherefore, here, alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Conversing as I may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I sit upon this old gray stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And dream my time away.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-tables-turned" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">
					<span>The Tables Turned</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">An Evening Scene on the Same Subject</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Up! up! my Friend, and clear your looks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why all this toil and trouble?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up! up! my Friend, and quit your books,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or surely you’ll grow double.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sun, above the mountain’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A freshening lustre mellow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the long green fields has spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His first sweet evening yellow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Books! ’tis a dull and endless strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, hear the woodland Linnet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sweet his music! on my life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s more of wisdom in it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And hark! how blithe the Throstle sings!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he is no mean preacher:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come forth into the light of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let Nature be your teacher.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She has a world of ready wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our minds and hearts to bless⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truth breathed by cheerfulness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One impulse from a vernal wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May teach you more of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of moral evil and of good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than all the sages can.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet is the lore which Nature brings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our meddling intellect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misshapes the beauteous forms of things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—We murder to dissect.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Enough of Science and of Art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close up these barren leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come forth, and bring with you a heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That watches and receives.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="animal-tranquillity-and-decay" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">
					<span>Animal Tranquillity and Decay</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A Sketch</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">The little hedge-row birds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That peck along the road, regard him not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He travels on, and in his face, his step,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His gait, is one expression; every limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His look and bending figure, all bespeak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man who does not move with pain, but moves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thought.⁠—He is insensibly subdued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To settled quiet: he is one by whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All effort seems forgotten; one to whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long patience hath such mild composure given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That patience now doth seem a thing of which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath no need. He is by nature led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To peace so perfect, that the young behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With envy, what the Old Man hardly feels.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—I asked him whither he was bound, and what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The object of his journey: he replied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was going many miles to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A last leave of his Son, a Mariner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from a sea-fight had been brought to Falmouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there was dying in an hospital.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="goody-blake-and-harry-gill" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">
					<span>Goody Blake and Harry Gill</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A True Story</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! what’s the matter? what’s the matter?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is’t that ails young Harry Gill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That evermore his teeth they chatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chatter, chatter, chatter still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of waistcoats Harry has no lack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good duffle gray, and flannel fine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has a blanket on his back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And coats enough to smother nine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In March, December, and in July,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis all the same with Harry Gill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighbours tell, and tell you truly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His teeth they chatter, chatter still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At night, at morning, and at noon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis all the same with Harry Gill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the sun, beneath the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His teeth they chatter, chatter still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Young Harry was a lusty drover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who so stout of limb as he?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cheeks were red as ruddy clover;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His voice was like the voice of three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Goody Blake was old and poor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill fed she was, and thinly clad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And any man who pass’d her door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might see how poor a hut she had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All day she spun in her poor dwelling:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then her three hours’ work at night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! ’twas hardly worth the telling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would not pay for candle-light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—This woman dwelt in Dorsetshire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hut was on a cold hill side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that country coals are dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they come far by wind and tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By the same fire to boil their pottage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two poor old Dames, as I have known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will often live in one small cottage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she, poor Woman! dwelt alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas well enough when summer came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long, warm, lightsome summer-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then at her door the <i>canty</i> Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would sit, as any linnet gay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when the ice our streams did fetter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! then how her old bones would shake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You would have said, if you had met her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas a hard time for Goody Blake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her evenings then were dull and dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad case it was, as you may think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very cold to go to bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then for cold not sleep a wink.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh joy for her! whene’er in winter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winds at night had made a rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scatter’d many a lusty splinter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a rotten bough about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet never had she, well or sick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As every man who knew her says,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pile before hand, wood or stick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough to warm her for three days.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when the frost was past enduring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made her poor old bones to ache,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could any thing be more alluring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than an old hedge to Goody Blake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, now and then, it must be said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When her old bones were cold and chill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She left her fire, or left her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seek the hedge of Harry Gill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now Harry he had long suspected</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This trespass of old Goody Blake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vow’d that she should be detected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he on her would vengeance take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft from his warm fire he’d go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the fields his road would take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, at night, in frost and snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He watch’d to seize old Goody Blake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And once, behind a rick of barley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus looking out did Harry stand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon was full and shining clearly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crisp with frost the stubble land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—He hears a noise⁠—he’s all awake⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again?⁠—on tip-toe down the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He softly creeps⁠—’Tis Goody Blake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’s at the hedge of Harry Gill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Right glad was he when he beheld her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stick after stick did Goody pull:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stood behind a bush of elder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she had filled her apron full.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When with her load she turned about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bye-road back again to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He started forward with a shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sprang upon poor Goody Blake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And fiercely by the arm he took her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the arm he held her fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fiercely by the arm he shook her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cried, “I’ve caught you then at last!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Goody, who had nothing said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bundle from her lap let fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, kneeling on the sticks, she pray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To God that is the judge of all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She pray’d, her wither’d hand uprearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Harry held her by the arm⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“God! who art never out of hearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O may he never more be warm!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cold, cold moon above her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus on her knees did Goody pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young Harry heard what she had said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And icy cold he turned away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He went complaining all the morrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was cold and very chill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His face was gloom, his heart was sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! that day for Harry Gill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day he wore a riding-coat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not a whit the warmer he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another was on Thursday brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ere the Sabbath he had three.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas all in vain, a useless matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blankets were about him pinn’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still his jaws and teeth they clatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a loose casement in the wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Harry’s flesh it fell away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all who see him say, ’tis plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That live as long as live he may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He never will be warm again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No word to any man he utters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A-bed or up, to young or old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever to himself he mutters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Poor Harry Gill is very cold.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A-bed or up, by night or day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His teeth they chatter, chatter still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now think, ye farmers all, I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Goody Blake and Harry Gill.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-last-of-the-flock" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Last of the Flock</h4>
				<p>
					<span>In distant countries I have been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I have not often seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A healthy Man, a Man full grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep in the public roads alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such a one, on English ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the broad high-way, I met;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the broad high-way he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cheeks with tears were wet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sturdy he seemed, though he was sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his arms a Lamb he had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He saw me, and he turned aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he wished himself to hide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with his coat he made essay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wipe those briny tears away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I followed him, and said, “My Friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ails you? wherefore weep you so?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“Shame on me, Sir! this lusty Lamb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He makes my tears to flow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Today I fetched him from the rock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is the last of all my flock.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When I was young, a single Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after youthful follies ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though little given to care and thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, so it was, a Ewe I bought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other sheep from her I raised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As healthy sheep as you might see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then I married, and was rich</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I could wish to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sheep I numbered a full score,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every year increased my store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Year after year my stock it grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from this one, this single Ewe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full fifty comely sheep I raised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sweet a flock as ever grazed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the mountain did they feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They throve, and we at home did thrive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—This lusty Lamb of all my store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is all that is alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now I care not if we die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And perish all of poverty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Six Children, Sir! had I to feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard labour in a time of need!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pride was tamed, and in our grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I of the Parish ask’d relief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They said I was a wealthy man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sheep upon the mountain fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it was fit that thence I took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof to buy us bread.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Do this: how can we give to you,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cried, “what to the poor is due?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I sold a sheep, as they had said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bought my little children bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they were healthy with their food;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me⁠—it never did me good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woeful time it was for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the end of all my gains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pretty flock which I had reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all my care and pains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see it melt like snow away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me it was woeful day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Another still! and still another!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little lamb, and then its mother!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a vein that never stopp’d⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like blood-drops from my heart they dropp’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thirty were not left alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They dwindled, dwindled, one by one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I may say, that many a time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wished they all were gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They dwindled one by one away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me it was a woeful day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To wicked deeds I was inclined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wicked fancies cross’d my mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every man I chanced to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought he knew some ill of me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No peace, no comfort could I find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No ease, within doors or without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crazily, and wearily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I went my work about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft-times I thought to run away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me it was a woeful day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir! ’twas a precious flock to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dear as my own Children be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For daily with my growing store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved my Children more and more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! it was an evil time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God cursed me in my sore distress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I prayed, yet every day I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved my Children less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every week, and every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My flock, it seemed to melt away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They dwindled, Sir, sad sight to see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From ten to five, from five to three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lamb, a wether, and a ewe;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, at last, from three to two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of my fifty, yesterday</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had but only one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here it lies upon my arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! and I have none;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Today I fetched it from the rock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is the last of all my flock.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="lines-left-upon-a-seat-in-a-yew-tree" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">Lines Left Upon a Seat in a Yew-Tree, Which Stands Near the Lake of Estwaithe, on a Desolate Part of the Shore, Yet Commanding a Beautiful Prospect</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Nay, Traveller! rest. This lonely Yew-tree stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from all human dwelling: what if here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sparkling rivulet spread the verdant herb?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What if these barren boughs the bee not loves?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, if the wind breathe soft, the curling waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That break against the shore, shall lull thy mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one soft impulse saved from vacancy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>⸻Who he was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That piled these stones, and with the mossy sod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First covered o’er, and taught this aged Tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its dark arms to form a circling bower,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I well remember.⁠—He was one who owned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No common soul. In youth by science nursed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led by nature into a wild scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lofty hopes, he to the world went forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A favoured being, knowing no desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which genius did not hallow, ’gainst the taint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dissolute tongues, and jealousy, and hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scorn, against all enemies prepared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All but neglect. The world, for so it thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Owed him no service: wherefore he at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With indignation turned himself away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the food of pride sustained his soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solitude.⁠—Stranger! these gloomy boughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had charms for him; and here he loved to sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His only visitants a straggling sheep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stone-chat, or the glancing sand-piper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on these barren rocks, with juniper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heath, and thistle, thinly sprinkled o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fixing his down-cast eye, he many an hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A morbid pleasure nourished, tracing here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An emblem of his own unfruitful life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lifting up his head, he then would gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the more distant scene⁠—how lovely ’tis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seest⁠—and he would gaze till it became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far lovelier, and his heart could not sustain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beauty still more beauteous. Nor, that time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Nature had subdued him to herself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would he forget those beings, to whose minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm from the labours of benevolence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world, and man himself, appeared a scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of kindred loveliness: then he would sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mournful joy, to think that others felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What he must never feel: and so, lost Man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On visionary views would fancy feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till his eye streamed with tears. In this deep vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He died⁠—this seat his only monument.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If Thou be one whose heart the holy forms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of young imagination have kept pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stranger! henceforth be warned; and know, that pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howe’er disguised in its own majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is littleness; that he who feels contempt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any living thing hath faculties</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he has never used; that thought with him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in its infancy. The man whose eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is ever on himself doth look on one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The least of Nature’s works, one who might move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wise man to that scorn which wisdom holds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlawful, ever. O be wiser, Thou!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instructed that true knowledge leads to love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True dignity abides with him alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, in the silent hour of inward thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can still suspect, and still revere himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lowliness of heart.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-foster-mothers-tale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">
					<span>The Foster-Mother’s Tale</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A Narration in Dramatic Blank Verse</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">But that entrance, Mother!</span>
				</p>
				<p class="voice">
					<span>Foster-Mother</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Can no one hear? It is a perilous tale!</span>
				</p>
				<p class="voice">
					<span>Maria</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No one.</span>
				</p>
				<p class="voice">
					<span>Foster-Mother</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">My husband’s father told it me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor old Leoni!⁠—Angels rest his soul!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a woodman, and could fell and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lusty arm. You know that huge round beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which props the hanging wall of the old chapel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath that tree, while yet it was a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found a baby wrapt in mosses lined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thistle-beards, and such small locks of wool</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hang on brambles. Well, he brought him home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reared him at the then Lord Velez’ cost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so the babe grew up a pretty boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pretty boy, but most unteachable⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never learnt a prayer, nor told a bead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But knew the names of birds, and mocked their notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whistled, as he were a bird himself:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the autumn ’twas\ his only play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gather seeds of wild flowers, and to plant them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With earth and water on the stumps of trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Friar, who sought for simples in the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gray-haired man⁠—he loved this little boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boy loved him⁠—and, when the Friar taught him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He soon could write with the pen; and from that time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lived chiefly at the Convent or the Castle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he became a very learned youth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Oh! poor wretch⁠—he read, and read, and read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till his brain turned⁠—and ere his twentieth year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had unlawful thoughts of many things:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though he prayed, he never loved to pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With holy men, nor in a holy place⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet his speech, it was so soft and sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The late Lord Velez ne’er was wearied with him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once, as by the north side of the Chapel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stood together, chained in deep discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth heaved under them with such a groan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the wall tottered, and had well-nigh fallen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right on their heads. My Lord was sorely frightened;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fever seized him, and he made confession</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the heretical and lawless talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which brought this judgment: so the youth was seized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast into that cell. My husband’s father</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sobbed like a child⁠—it almost broke his heart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once as he was working near the cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard a voice distinctly; ’twas the youth’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sang a doleful song about green fields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sweet it were on lake or wild savannah,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hunt for food, and be a naked man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wander up and down at liberty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leoni doted on the youth, and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His love grew desperate; and defying death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made that cunning entrance I described:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the young man escaped.</span>
				</p>
				<p class="voice">
					<span>Maria</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Tis a sweet tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what became of him?</span>
				</p>
				<p class="voice">
					<span>Foster-Mother</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">He went on ship-board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With those bold voyagers who made discovery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of golden lands. Leoni’s younger brother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went likewise; and when he returned to Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He told Leoni, that the poor mad youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon after they arrived in that new world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In spite of his dissuasion, seized a boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, all alone, set sail by silent moonlight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up a great river, great as any sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ne’er was heard of more: but ’tis supposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lived and died among the savage men.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-thorn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Thorn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></h4>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-1" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h5>
					<p>
						<span>There is a Thorn⁠—it looks so old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In truth, you’d find it hard to say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How it could ever have been young⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It looks so old and gray.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not higher than a two years’ child</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It stands erect, this aged Thorn;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No leaves it has, no thorny points;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is a mass of knotted joints,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A wretched thing forlorn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It stands erect, and like a stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With lichens it is overgrown.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-2" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h5>
					<p>
						<span>Like rock or stone, it is o’ergrown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With lichens to the very top,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hung with heavy tufts of moss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A melancholy crop:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up from the earth these mosses creep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And this poor Thorn they clasp it round</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So close, you’d say that they were bent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With plain and manifest intent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To drag it to the ground;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all had joined in one endeavour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bury this poor Thorn for ever.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-3" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h5>
					<p>
						<span>High on a mountain’s highest ridge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where oft the stormy winter gale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cuts like a scythe, while through the clouds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It sweeps from vale to vale;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not five yards from the mountain path,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Thorn you on your left espy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the left, three yards beyond,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You see a little muddy Pond</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of water never dry;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ve measured it from side to side:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis three feet long, and two feet wide.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-4" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h5>
					<p>
						<span>And, close beside this aged Thorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is a fresh and lovely sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A beauteous heap, a Hill of moss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just half a foot in height.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All lovely colours there you see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All colours that were ever seen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mossy net-work too is there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if by hand of lady fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The work had woven been;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cups, the darlings of the eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So deep is their vermilion dye.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-5" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h5>
					<p>
						<span>Ah me! what lovely tints are there!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of olive green and scarlet bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In spikes, in branches, and in stars,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Green, red, and pearly white.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This heap of earth o’ergrown with moss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which close beside the Thorn you see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fresh in all its beauteous dyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is like an infant’s grave in size,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As like as like can be:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But never, never any where,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An infant’s grave was half so fair.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-6" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h5>
					<p>
						<span>Now would you see this aged Thorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Pond, and beauteous Hill of moss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You must take care and choose your time</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mountain when to cross.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For oft there sits, between the Heap</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That’s like an infant’s grave in size,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that same Pond of which I spoke,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Woman in a scarlet cloak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to herself she cries,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Oh misery! oh misery!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh woe is me! oh misery!”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-7" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>At all times of the day and night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This wretched Woman thither goes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she is known to every star,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And every wind that blows;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there beside the Thorn she sits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the blue day-light’s in the skies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when the whirlwind’s on the hill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or frosty air is keen and still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to herself she cries,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Oh misery! oh misery!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh woe is me! oh misery!”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-8" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>“Now wherefore, thus, by day and night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In rain, in tempest, and in snow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus to the dreary mountain-top</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Does this poor Woman go?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And why sits she beside the Thorn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the blue day-light’s in the sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or when the whirlwind’s on the hill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or frosty air is keen and still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wherefore does she cry?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh wherefore? wherefore? tell me why</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Does she repeat that doleful cry?”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-9" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h5>
					<p>
						<span>I cannot tell; I wish I could;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the true reason no one knows:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if you’d gladly view the spot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The spot to which she goes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Heap that’s like an infant’s grave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Pond⁠—and Thorn, so old and gray;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pass by her door⁠—’tis seldom shut⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, if you see her in her hut,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then to the spot away!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never heard of such as dare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Approach the spot when she is there.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-10" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h5>
					<p>
						<span>“But wherefore to the mountain-top</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can this unhappy Woman go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whatever star is in the skies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whatever wind may blow?”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, rack your brain⁠—’tis all in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll tell you every thing I know;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to the Thorn, and to the Pond</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which is a little step beyond,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I wish that you would go:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perhaps, when you are at the place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You something of her tale may trace.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-11" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h5>
					<p>
						<span>I’ll give you the best help I can:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before you up the mountain go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to the dreary mountain-top,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll tell you all I know.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis now some two-and-twenty years</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since she (her name is Martha Ray)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gave with a maiden’s true good will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her company to Stephen Hill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she was blithe and gay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she was happy, happy still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whene’er she thought of Stephen Hill.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-12" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>And they had fix’d the wedding-day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The morning that must wed them both;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Stephen to another Maid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had sworn another oath;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with this other Maid to church</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unthinking Stephen went⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor Martha! on that woeful day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cruel, cruel fire, they say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into her bones was sent:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It dried her body like a cinder,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And almost turned her brain to tinder.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-13" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>They say, full six months after this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While yet the summer leaves were green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She to the mountain-top would go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there was often seen.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis said, a child was in her womb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As now to any eye was plain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was with child, and she was mad;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet often she was sober sad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From her exceeding pain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh me! ten thousand times I’d rather</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he had died, that cruel father!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-14" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h5>
					<p>
						<span>Sad case for such a brain to hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Communion with a stirring child!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sad case, as you may think, for one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who had a brain so wild!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Last Christmas when we talked of this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Old Farmer Simpson did maintain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in her womb the infant wrought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About its mother’s heart, and brought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her senses back again:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when at last her time drew near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her looks were calm, her senses clear.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-15" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h5>
					<p>
						<span>No more I know, I wish I did,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I would tell it all to you;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For what became of this poor child</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s none that ever knew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if a child was born or no,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s no one that could ever tell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if ’twas born alive or dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s no one knows, as I have said;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But some remember well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Martha Ray about this time</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would up the mountain often climb.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-16" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h5>
					<p>
						<span>And all that winter, when at night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wind blew from the mountain-peak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas worth your while, though in the dark,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The church-yard path to seek:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For many a time and oft were heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cries coming from the mountain-head:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some plainly living voices were;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And others, I’ve heard many swear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were voices of the dead:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot think, whate’er they say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They had to do with Martha Ray.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-17" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>But that she goes to this old Thorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Thorn which I’ve described to you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there sits in a scarlet cloak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will be sworn is true.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For one day with my telescope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To view the ocean wide and bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When to this country first I came,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere I had heard of Martha’s name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I climbed the mountain’s height:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A storm came on, and I could see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No object higher than my knee.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-18" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>’Twas mist and rain, and storm and rain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No screen, no fence could I discover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then the wind! in faith, it was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A wind full ten times over.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I looked around, I thought I saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A jutting crag, and off I ran,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Head-foremost, through the driving rain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The shelter of the crag to gain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as I am a man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instead of jutting crag, I found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Woman seated on the ground.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-19" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h5>
					<p>
						<span>I did not speak⁠—I saw her face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In truth it was enough for me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I turned about and heard her cry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“O misery! O misery!”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there she sits, until the moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through half the clear blue sky will go;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, when the little breezes make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The waters of the Pond to shake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As all the country know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She shudders, and you hear her cry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Oh misery! oh misery!”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-20" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h5>
					<p>
						<span>“But what’s the Thorn? and what’s the Pond?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what’s the Hill of moss to her?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what’s the creeping breeze that comes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The little Pond to stir?”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot tell; but some will say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She hanged her baby on the tree;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some say she drowned it in the pond,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which is a little step beyond:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all and each agree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The little babe was buried there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath that Hill of moss so fair.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-21" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h5>
					<p>
						<span>I’ve heard, the moss is spotted red</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With drops of that poor infant’s blood:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But kill a new-born infant thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I do not think she could.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some say, if to the Pond you go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fix on it a steady view,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The shadow of a babe you trace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A baby and a baby’s face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that it looks at you;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whene’er you look on it, ’tis plain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The baby looks at you again.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-22" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>And some had sworn an oath that she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should be to public justice brought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for the little infant’s bones</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With spades they would have sought.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But then the beauteous Hill of moss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before their eyes began to stir;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for full fifty yards around,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The grass it shook upon the ground;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all do still aver</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The little babe is buried there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath that Hill of moss so fair.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-thorn-part-23" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>I cannot tell how this may be:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But plain it is, the Thorn is bound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With heavy tufts of moss, that strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To drag it to the ground.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And this I know, full many a time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When she was on the mountain high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By day, and in the silent night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When all the stars shone clear and bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I have heard her cry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Oh misery! oh misery!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh woe is me! oh misery!”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="we-are-seven" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4>We Are Seven</h4>
				<p>
					<span>A simple child, dear brother Jim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lightly draws its breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feels its life in every limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What should it know of death?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I met a little cottage Girl:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was eight years old, she said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hair was thick with many a curl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That clustered round her head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She had a rustic, woodland air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she was wildly clad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes were fair, and very fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Her beauty made me glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sisters and brothers, little Maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many may you be?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How many? Seven in all,” she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondering looked at me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And where are they? I pray you tell.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She answered, “Seven are we;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And two of us at Conway dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And two are gone to sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two of us in the church-yard lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sister and my brother;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the church-yard cottage I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwell near them with my mother.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“You say that two at Conway dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And two are gone to sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet you are seven; I pray you tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Maid, how this may be?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then did the little Maid reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Seven boys and girls are we;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two of us in the church-yard lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the church-yard tree.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“You run about, my little Maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your limbs they are alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If two are in the church-yard laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then ye are only five.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Their graves are green, they may be seen,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little Maid replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Twelve steps or more from mother’s door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they are side by side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My stockings there I often knit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My kerchief there I hem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there upon the ground I sit⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sit and sing to them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And often after sun-set, Sir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it is light and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I take my little porringer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eat my supper there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first that died was little Jane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bed she moaning lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till God released her of her pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then she went away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So in the church-yard she was laid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the summer dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together round her grave we played,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brother John and I.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And when the ground was white with snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I could run and slide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brother John was forced to go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he lies by her side.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“How many are you then,” said I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If they two are in Heaven?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little Maiden did reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Master! we are seven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But they are dead: those two are dead!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their spirits are in Heaven!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas throwing words away: for still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little Maid would have her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Nay, we are seven!”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="anecdote-for-fathers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4>
					<span>Anecdote for Fathers</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Showing How the Practice of Lying May Be Taught</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I have a Boy of five years old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His face is fair and fresh to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His limbs are cast in beauty’s mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dearly he loves me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One morn we stroll’d on our dry walk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our quiet home all full in view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And held such intermitted talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we are wont to do.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My thoughts on former pleasures ran:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought of Kilve’s delightful shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our pleasant home, when Spring began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A long, long year before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A day it was when I could bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think, and think, and think again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With so much happiness to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could not feel a pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My Boy was by my side, so slim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And graceful in his rustic dress!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oftentimes I talked to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In very idleness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The young lambs ran a pretty race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning sun shone bright and warm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Kilve,” said I, “was a pleasant place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so is Liswyn farm.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My little Boy, which like you more,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I said, and took him by the arm⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Our home by Kilve’s delightful shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or here at Liswyn farm?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And tell me, had you rather be,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I said, and held him by the arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“At Kilve’s smooth shore by the green sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or here at Liswyn farm?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In careless mood he looked at me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While still I held him by the arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “At Kilve I’d rather be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than here at Liswyn farm.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, little Edward, say why so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little Edward, tell me why.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I cannot tell, I do not know.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why, this is strange,” said I.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For, here are woods, and green-hills warm:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There surely must some reason be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why you would change sweet Liswyn farm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Kilve by the green sea.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At this, my Boy hung down his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He blush’d with shame, nor made reply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And five times to the Child I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why, Edward, tell me why?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His head he raised⁠—there was in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It caught his eye, he saw it plain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the house-top, glittering bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A broad and gilded vane.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then did the boy his tongue unlock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus to me he made reply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“At Kilve there was no weather-cock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that’s the reason why.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh dearest, dearest Boy! my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For better lore would seldom yearn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I but teach the hundredth part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what from thee I learn.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="lines-written-at-a-small-distance-from-my-house" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">Lines Written at a Small Distance from My House, and Sent by My Little Boy to the Person to Whom They Are Addressed</h4>
				<p>
					<span>It is the first mild day of March:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each minute sweeter than before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Red-breast sings from the tall Larch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stands beside our door.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is a blessing in the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which seems a sense of joy to yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the bare trees, and mountains bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grass in the green field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My Sister! (’tis a wish of mine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now that our morning meal is done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make haste, your morning task resign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come forth and feel the sun.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Edward will come with you; and pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put on with speed your woodland dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring no book: for this one day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll give to idleness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No joyless forms shall regulate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our living Calendar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We from today, my Friend, will date</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The opening of the year.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Love, now an universal birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From heart to heart is stealing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From earth to man, from man to earth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—It is the hour of feeling.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One moment now may give us more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than fifty years of reason:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our minds shall drink at every pore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spirit of the season.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some silent laws our hearts may make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which they shall long obey:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We for the year to come may take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our temper from to-day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And from the blessed power that rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About, below, above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll frame the measure of our souls:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shall be tuned to love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then come, my Sister! come, I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With speed put on your woodland dress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—And bring no book: for this one day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll give to idleness.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-female-vagrant" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Female Vagrant</h4>
				<p>
					<span>My Father was a good and pious man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An honest man by honest parents bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I believe, that, soon as I began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lisp, he made me kneel beside my bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his hearing there my prayers I said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterwards, by my good Father taught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I read, and loved the books in which I read;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For books in every neighbouring house I sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing to my mind a sweeter pleasure brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The suns of twenty summers danced along⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! little marked how fast they rolled away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then rose a stately Hall our woods among,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cottage after cottage owned its sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No joy to see a neighbouring House, or stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through pastures not his own, the master took;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Father dared his greedy wish gainsay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He loved his old hereditary nook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ill could I the thought of such sad parting brook.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when he had refused the proffered gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cruel injuries he became a prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sore traversed in whate’er he bought and sold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His troubles grew upon him day by day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his substance fell into decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They dealt most hardly with him, and he tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To move their hearts⁠—but it was vain⁠—for they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seized all he had; and, weeping side by side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We sought a home where we uninjured might abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was in truth a lamentable hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, from the last hill-top, my Sire surveyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peering above the trees, the steeple tower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on his marriage-day sweet music made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till then he hoped his bones might there be laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close by my Mother, in their native bowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bidding me trust in God, he stood and prayed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could not pray:⁠—through tears that fell in showers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw our own dear home, that was no longer ours.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was a Youth, whom I had loved so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when I loved him not I cannot say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid the green mountains many and many a song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We two had sung, like gladsome birds in May.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we began to tire of childish play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We seemed still more and more to prize each other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We talked of marriage and our marriage day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I in truth did love him like a brother;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never could I hope to meet with such another.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two years were pass’d, since to a distant Town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had repair’d to ply the artist’s trade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What tears of bitter grief till then unknown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What tender vows our last sad kiss delayed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him we turned:⁠—we had no other aid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one revived, upon his neck I wept:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her whom he had loved in joy, he said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He well could love in grief: his faith he kept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a quiet home once more my Father slept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We lived in peace and comfort; and were blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With daily bread, by constant toil supplied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three lovely Infants lay upon my breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often, viewing their sweet smiles, I sighed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew not why. My happy Father died</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sad distress reduced the Children’s meal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice happy! that from him the grave did hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The empty loom, cold hearth, and silent wheel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tears that flowed for ills which patience could not heal.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas a hard change, an evil time was come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We had no hope, and no relief could gain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon, day after day, the noisy drum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beat round, to sweep the streets of want and pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My husband’s arms now only served to strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me and his children hungering in his view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such dismay my prayers and tears were vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To join those miserable men he flew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now to the sea-coast, with numbers more, we drew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, long were we neglected, and we bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much sorrow ere the fleet its anchor weigh’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green fields before us and our native shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We breath’d a pestilential air that made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ravage for which no knell was heard. We pray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For our departure; wish’d and wish’d⁠—nor knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid that long sickness, and those hopes delay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That happier days we never more must view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The parting signal streamed, at last the land withdrew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the calm summer season now was past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On as we drove, the equinoctial Deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran mountains-high before the howling blast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many perished in the whirlwind’s sweep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We gazed with terror on their gloomy sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untaught that soon such anguish must ensue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our hopes such harvest of affliction reap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we the mercy of the waves should rue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We reach’d the Western World, a poor, devoted crew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The pains and plagues that on our heads came down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disease and famine, agony and fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wood or wilderness, in camp or town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would thy brain unsettle, even to hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All perished⁠—all, in one remorseless year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Husband and Children! one by one, by sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ravenous plague, all perished: every tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dried up, despairing, desolate, on board</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A British ship I waked, as from a trance restored.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Peaceful as some immeasurable plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the first beams of dawning light impress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the calm sunshine slept the glittering main.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very ocean has its hour of rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I too was calm, though heavily distress’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh me, how quiet sky and ocean were!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart was healed within me, I was bless’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looked, and looked along the silent air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it seemed to bring a joy to my despair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! how unlike those late terrific sleeps!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groans, that rage of racking famine spoke!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unburied dead that lay in festering heaps!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breathing pestilence that rose like smoke!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shriek that from the distant battle broke!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mine’s dire earthquake, and the pallid host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driven by the bomb’s incessant thunder-stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To loathsome vaults, where heart-sick anguish toss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope died, and fear itself in agony was lost!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At midnight once the storming Army came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet do I see the miserable sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Bayonet, the Soldier, and the Flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That followed us and faced us in our flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Rape and Murder by the ghastly light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seized their joint prey, the Mother and the Child!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I must leave these thoughts.⁠—From night to night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From day to day, the air breathed soft and mild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the gliding vessel Heaven and Ocean smiled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some mighty gulph of separation past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I seemed transported to another world:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thought resigned with pain, when from the mast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The impatient mariner the sail unfurl’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, whistling, called the wind that hardly curled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent sea. From the sweet thoughts of home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from all hope I was forever hurled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me⁠—farthest from earthly port to roam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was best, could I but shun the spot where man might come.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And oft I thought (my fancy was so strong)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I at last a resting-place had found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Here will I dwell,” said I, “my whole life-long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roaming the illimitable waters round:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here will I live:⁠—of every friend disown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here will I roam about the ocean-flood.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break my dream the vessel reached its bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And homeless near a thousand homes I stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And near a thousand tables pin’d , and wanted food.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By grief enfeebled was I turned adrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helpless as sailor cast on desert rock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor morsel to my mouth that day did lift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor dared my hand at any door to knock.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lay where, with his drowsy Mates, the Cock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the cross timber of an out-house hung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismally tolled, that night, the city clock!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At morn my sick heart hunger scarcely stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to the beggar’s language could I frame my tongue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So pass’d another day, and so the third;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did I try in vain the crowd’s resort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—In deep despair by frightful wishes stirr’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near the sea-side I reached a ruined Fort:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, pains which nature could no more support,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blindness link’d, did on my vitals fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I had many interruptions short</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hideous sense; I sank, nor step could crawl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thence was carried to a neighbouring Hospital.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Recovery came with food: but still, my brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was weak, nor of the past had memory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard my neighbours, in their beds, complain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many things which never troubled me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feet still bustling round with busy glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of looks where common kindness had no part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of service done with careless cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fretting the fever round the languid heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groans, which, as they said, would make a dead man start.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These things just served to stir the torpid sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor pain nor pity in my bosom raised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My memory and my strength returned; and thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismissed, again on open day I gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At houses, men, and common light, amazed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lanes I sought, and, as the sun retired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came where beneath the trees a faggot blazed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Travellers saw me weep, my fate inquired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave me food⁠—and rest, more welcome, more desired.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My heart is touched to think that men like these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild houseless Wanderers, were my first relief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How kindly did they paint their vagrant ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their long holiday that feared not grief!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all belonged to all, and each was chief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No plough their sinews strained; on grating road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wain they drove; and yet the yellow sheaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every vale for their delight was stow’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every field, with milk their dairy overflow’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They with their pannier’d Asses semblance made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Potters wandering on from door to door:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But life of happier sort to me pourtray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other joys my fancy to allure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bag-pipe dinning on the midnight moor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In barn uplighted, and Companions boon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well met from far with revelry secure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the forest glades, when jocund June</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rolled fast along the sky his warm and genial moon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ill they suited me; those journeys dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er moor and mountain, midnight theft to hatch!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To charm the surly House-dog’s faithful bark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hang on tip-toe at the lifted latch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gloomy lantern, and the dim blue match,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The black disguise, the warning whistle shrill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ear still busy on its nightly watch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were not for me, brought up in nothing ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, on griefs so fresh my thoughts were brooding still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What could I do, unaided and unblest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Father! gone was every friend of thine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kindred of dead husband are at best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small help; and, after marriage such as mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With little kindness would to me incline.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill was I then for toil or service fit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tears whose course no effort could confine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the road-side forgetful would I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whole hours, my idle arms in moping sorrow knit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I led a wandering life among the fields;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contentedly, yet sometimes self-accused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lived upon what casual bounty yields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now coldly given, now utterly refused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ground I for my bed have often used:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, what afflicts my peace with keenest ruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is, that I have my inner self abused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgone the home delight of constant truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clear and open soul, so prized in fearless youth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Three years thus wandering, often have I view’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tears, the sun towards that country tend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where my poor heart lost all its fortitude:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now across this moor my steps I bend⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! tell me whither⁠—for no earthly friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I.”⁠—She ceased, and weeping turned away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if because her tale was at an end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wept;⁠—because she had no more to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that perpetual weight which on her spirit lay.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="lines-written-in-early-spring" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">Lines Written in Early Spring</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I heard a thousand blended notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While in a grove I sate reclined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring sad thoughts to the mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To her fair works did Nature link</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The human soul that through me ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And much it griev’d my heart to think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What man has made of man.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through primrose tufts, in that sweet bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The periwinkle trailed its wreaths;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’tis my faith that every flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoys the air it breathes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The birds around me hopp’d and play’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their thoughts I cannot measure:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the least motion which they made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed a thrill of pleasure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The budding twigs spread out their fan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To catch the breezy air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must think, do all I can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there was pleasure there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If I these thoughts may not prevent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If such be of my creed the plan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I not reason to lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What man has made of man?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="simon-lee" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4>
					<span>Simon Lee, the Old Huntsman</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">With an Incident in Which He Was Concerned</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>In the sweet shire of Cardigan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An Old Man dwells, a little man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve heard he once was tall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of years he has upon his back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt, a burthen weighty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He says he is three score and ten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But others say he’s eighty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A long blue livery-coat has he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s fair behind, and fair before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, meet him where you will, you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once that he is poor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full five-and-twenty years he lived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A running Huntsman merry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though he has but one eye left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cheek is like a cherry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No man like him the horn could sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no man was so full of glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say the least, four counties round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had heard of Simon Lee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Master’s dead, and no one now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwells in the hall of Ivor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men, Dogs, and Horses, all are dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is the sole survivor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he is lean and he is sick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His dwindled body’s half awry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ancles they are swoln and thick;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His legs are thin and dry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he was young he little knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of husbandry or tillage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now he’s forced to work, though weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—The weakest in the village.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He all the country could outrun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could leave both man and horse behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often, ere the race was done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He reeled and was stone-blind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still there’s something in the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which his heart rejoices;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when the chiming hounds are out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He dearly loves their voices!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His hunting feats have him bereft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his right eye, as you may see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, what limbs those feats have left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To poor old Simon Lee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has no son, he has no child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Wife, an aged woman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lives with him, near the waterfall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the village Common.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Old Ruth works out of doors with him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And does what Simon cannot do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she, not over stout of limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is stouter of the two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though you with your utmost skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From labour could not wean them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! ’tis very little, all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which they can do between them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beside their moss-grown hut of clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not twenty paces from the door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scrap of land they have, but they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are poorest of the poor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This scrap of land he from the heath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enclosed when he was stronger;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what avails the land to them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which they can till no longer?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Few months of life has he in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he to you will tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For still, the more he works, the more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His poor old ancles swell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My gentle Reader, I perceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How patiently you’ve waited,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I’m afraid that you expect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some tale will be related.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Reader! had you in your mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such stores as silent thought can bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O gentle Reader! you would find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tale in every thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What more I have to say is short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hope you’ll kindly take it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is no tale; but, should you think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps a tale you’ll make it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One summer-day I chanced to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Old Man doing all he could</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the root of an old tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stump of rotten wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mattock tottered in his hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So vain was his endeavour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the root of the old tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might have worked for ever.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“You’re overtasked, good Simon Lee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me your tool,” to him I said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the word right gladly he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received my proffered aid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I struck, and with a single blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tangled root I severed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which the poor Old Man so long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vainly had endeavoured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The tears into his eyes were brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thanks and praises seemed to run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fast out of his heart, I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They never would have done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—I’ve heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With coldness still returning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! the gratitude of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has oftener left me mourning.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-nightingale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">
					<span>The Nightingale</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Written in April, 1798</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>No cloud, no relique of the sunken day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinguishes the West, no long thin slip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sullen Light, no obscure trembling hues.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, we will rest on this old mossy Bridge!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You see the glimmer of the stream beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hear no murmuring: it flows silently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er its soft bed of verdure. All is still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A balmy night! and though the stars be dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet let us think upon the vernal showers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gladden the green earth, and we shall find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pleasure in the dimness of the stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hark! the Nightingale begins its song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Most musical, most melancholy”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> Bird!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A melancholy Bird? O idle thought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In nature there is nothing melancholy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—But some night-wandering Man, whose heart was pierced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the remembrance of a grievous wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or slow distemper, or neglected love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(And so, poor wretch! filled all things with himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made all gentle sounds tell back the tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his own sorrows) he and such as he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First named these notes a melancholy strain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a poet echoes the conceit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poet, who hath been building up the rhyme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he had better far have stretched his limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside a brook in mossy forest-dell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sun- or moon-light, to the influxes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shapes and sounds and shifting elements</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surrendering his whole spirit, of his song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his fame forgetful! so his fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should share in nature’s immortality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A venerable thing! and so his song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should make all nature lovelier, and itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be loved, like nature!⁠—But ’twill not be so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And youths and maidens most poetical</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lose the deep’ning twilights of the spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ball-rooms and hot theatres, they still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of meek sympathy must heave their sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er Philomela’s pity-pleading strains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Friend, and my Friend’s Sister! we have learnt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A different lore: we may not thus profane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature’s sweet voices always full of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And joyance! ’Tis the merry Nightingale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That crowds, and hurries, and precipitates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fast thick warble his delicious notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he were fearful that an April night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would be too short for him to utter forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His love-chant, and disburthen his full soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all its music! And I know a grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of large extent, hard by a castle huge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the great lord inhabits not: and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This grove is wild with tangling underwood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the trim walks are broken up, and grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thin grass and king-cups grow within the paths.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never elsewhere in one place I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many Nightingales: and far and near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wood and thicket over the wide grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They answer and provoke each other’s songs⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With skirmish and capricious passagings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murmurs musical and swift jug jug</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one low piping sound more sweet than all⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stirring the air with such an harmony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, should you close your eyes, you might almost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forget it was not day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">A most gentle Maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dwelleth in her hospitable home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard by the Castle, and at latest eve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Even like a Lady vowed and dedicate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To something more than nature in the grove)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glides through the pathways; she knows all their notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gentle Maid! and oft, a moment’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time the moon was lost behind a cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath heard a pause of silence: till the Moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emerging, hath awakened earth and sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one sensation, and those wakeful Birds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have all burst forth in choral minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if one quick and sudden Gale had swept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An hundred airy harps! And she hath watched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a Nightingale perch giddily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On blosmy twig still swinging from the breeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to that motion tune his wanton song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like tipsy Joy that reels with tossing head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Farewell, O Warbler! till to-morrow eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you, my friends! farewell, a short farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have been loitering long and pleasantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now for our dear homes.⁠—That strain again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full fain would it delay me! My dear Babe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, capable of no articulate sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mars all things with his imitative lisp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he would place his hand beside his ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His little hand, the small forefinger up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid us listen! And I deem it wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make him Nature’s playmate. He knows well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The evening star: and once when he awoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In most distressful mood (some inward pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had made up that strange thing, an infant’s dream)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hurried with him to our orchard plot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he beholds the moon, and hushed at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suspends his sobs, and laughs most silently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his fair eyes that swam with undropt tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did glitter in the yellow moon-beam! Well⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is a father’s tale. But if that Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should give me life, his childhood shall grow up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Familiar with these songs, that with the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may associate Joy! Once more farewell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Nightingale! once more, my friends! farewell.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-idiot-boy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Idiot Boy</h4>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis eight o’clock⁠—a clear March night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Moon is up⁠—the Sky is blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Owlet in the moonlight air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shouts from nobody knows where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lengthens out his lonely shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Halloo! halloo! a long halloo!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—Why bustle thus about your door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What means this bustle, Betty Foy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why are you in this mighty fret?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And why on horseback have you set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom you love, your Idiot Boy?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beneath the Moon that shines so bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she is tired, let Betty Foy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With girt and stirrup fiddle-faddle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wherefore set upon a saddle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There’s scarce a soul that’s out of bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good Betty, put him down again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lips with joy they burr at you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Betty! what has he to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stirrup, saddle, or with rein?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The world will say ’tis very idle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bethink you of the time of night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s not a mother, no not one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when she hears what you have done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Betty, she’ll be in a fright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Betty’s bent on her intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For her good neighbour, Susan Gale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Susan, she who dwells alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sick, and makes a piteous moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if her very life would fail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There’s not a house within a mile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No hand to help them in distress:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Susan lies a-bed in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sorely puzzled are the twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what she ails they cannot guess.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty’s Husband’s at the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where by the week he doth abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Woodman in the distant vale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s none to help poor Susan Gale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What must be done? what will betide?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty from the lane has fetched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Pony, that is mild and good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether he be in joy or pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeding at will along the lane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bringing faggots from the wood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he is all in travelling trim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the moonlight, Betty Foy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has up upon the saddle set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The like was never heard of yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he must post without delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the bridge that’s in the dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the church, and o’er the down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring a Doctor from the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or she will die, old Susan Gale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is no need of boot or spur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no need of whip or wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Johnny has his holly-bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a hurly-burly now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shakes the green bough in his hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty o’er and o’er has told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Boy who is her best delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both what to follow, what to shun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What do, and what to leave undone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How turn to left, and how to right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty’s most especial charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was, “Johnny! Johnny! mind that you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come home again, nor stop at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come home again, whate’er befal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Johnny, do, I pray you do.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To this did Johnny answer make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both with his head, and with his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And proudly shook the bridle too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then! his words were not a few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Betty well could understand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now that Johnny is just going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Betty’s in a mighty flurry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gently pats the Pony’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which her Idiot Boy must ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seems no longer in a hurry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when the Pony moved his legs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! then for the poor Idiot Boy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For joy he cannot hold the bridle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For joy his head and heels are idle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s idle all for very joy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And while the Pony moves his legs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Johnny’s left hand you may see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The green bough’s motionless and dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Moon that shines above his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not more still and mute than he.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His heart it was so full of glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That till full fifty yards were gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He quite forgot his holly whip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his skill in horsemanship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! happy, happy, happy John.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty’s standing at the door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Betty’s face with joy o’erflows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud of herself, and proud of him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sees him in his travelling trim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How quietly her Johnny goes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The silence of her Idiot Boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hopes it sends to Betty’s heart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s at the Guide-post⁠—he turns right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She watches till he’s out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Betty will not then depart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Burr, burr⁠—now Johnny’s lips they burr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As loud as any mill, or near it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meek as a lamb the Pony moves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Johnny makes the noise he loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Betty listens, glad to hear it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Away she hies to Susan Gale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Johnny’s in a merry tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Owlets hoot, the Owlets curr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Johnny’s lips they burr, burr, burr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on he goes beneath the Moon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His Steed and He right well agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of this Pony there’s a rumour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That should he lose his eyes and ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And should he live a thousand years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He never will be out of humour.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But then he is a Horse that thinks!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he thinks his pace is slack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, though he knows poor Johnny well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for his life he cannot tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What he has got upon his back.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So through the moonlight lanes they go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far into the moonlight dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the church, and o’er the down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring a Doctor from the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To comfort poor old Susan Gale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty, now at Susan’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in the middle of her story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What comfort Johnny soon will bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a most diverting thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Johnny’s wit and Johnny’s glory.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty’s still at Susan’s side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this time she’s not quite so flurried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Demure with porringer and plate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sits, as if in Susan’s fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her life and soul were buried.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Betty, poor good Woman! she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You plainly in her face may read it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could lend out of that moment’s store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Five years of happiness or more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any that might need it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet I guess that now and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Betty all was not so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the road she turns her ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thence full many a sound she hears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which she to Susan will not tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“As sure as there’s a moon in heaven,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cries Betty, “he’ll be back again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’ll both be here⁠—’tis almost ten⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’ll both be here before eleven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clock gives warning for eleven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis on the stroke⁠—“If Johnny’s near,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth Betty “he will soon be here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sure as there’s a moon in heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The clock is on the stroke of twelve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Johnny is not yet in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—The Moon’s in heaven, as Betty sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Betty is not quite at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Susan has a dreadful night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty, half an hour ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Johnny vile reflections cast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A little idle sauntering Thing!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other names, an endless string,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now that time is gone and past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty’s drooping at the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That happy time all past and gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How can it be he is so late?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Doctor he has made him wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Susan! they’ll both be here anon.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Susan’s growing worse and worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Betty’s in a sad quandary;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then there’s nobody to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If she must go or she must stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—She’s in a sad quandary.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The clock is on the stroke of one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But neither Doctor nor his Guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear along the moonlight road;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s neither horse nor man abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Betty’s still at Susan’s side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Susan she begins to fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sad mischances not a few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Johnny may perhaps be drowned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or lost, perhaps, and never found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which they must both for ever rue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She prefaced half a hint of this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With, “God forbid it should be true!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the first word that Susan said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried Betty, rising from the bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Susan, I’d gladly stay with you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I must be gone, I must away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consider, Johnny’s but half-wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Susan, we must take care of him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he is hurt in life or limb”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh God forbid!” poor Susan cries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What can I do?” says Betty, going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What can I do to ease your pain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good Susan tell me, and I’ll stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear you’re in a dreadful way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I shall soon be back again.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay, Betty, go! good Betty, go!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s nothing that can ease my pain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then off she hies, but with a prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That God poor Susan’s life would spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she comes back again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, through the moonlight lane she goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far into the moonlight dale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how she ran, and how she walked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that to herself she talked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would surely be a tedious tale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In high and low, above, below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In great and small, in round and square,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tree and tower was Johnny seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bush and brake, in black and green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas Johnny, Johnny, every where.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She’s past the bridge that’s in the dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the thought torments her sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Johnny perhaps his horse forsook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hunt the moon that’s in the brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never will be heard of more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now she’s high upon the down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone amid a prospect wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s neither Johnny nor his Horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the fern or in the gorse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s neither Doctor nor his Guide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh saints! what is become of him?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps he’s climbed into an oak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he will stay till he is dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, sadly he has been misled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And joined the wandering gypsey-folk.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or him that wicked Pony’s carried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the dark cave, the goblin’s hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the castle he’s pursuing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the ghosts his own undoing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or playing with the waterfall.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At poor old Susan then she railed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While to the town she posts away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If Susan had not been so ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! I should have had him still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Johnny, till my dying day.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Poor Betty! in this sad distemper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Doctor’s self would hardly spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unworthy things she talked and wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even he, of cattle the most mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Pony had his share.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now she’s got into the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Doctor’s door she hies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis silence all on every side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The town so long, the town so wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is silent as the skies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now she’s at the Doctor’s door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lifts the knocker, rap, rap, rap;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Doctor at the casement shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glimmering eyes that peep and dose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one hand rubs his old night-cap.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh Doctor! Doctor! where’s my Johnny?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I’m here, what is’t you want with me?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh Sir! you know I’m Betty Foy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I have lost my poor dear Boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You know him⁠—him you often see;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He’s not so wise as some folks be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The devil take his wisdom!” said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Doctor, looking somewhat grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What, Woman! should I know of him?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, grumbling, he went back to bed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O woe is me! O woe is me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here will I die; here will I die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought to find my Johnny here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he is neither far nor near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! what a wretched Mother I!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She stops, she stands, she looks about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which way to turn she cannot tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Betty! it would ease her pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If she had heart to knock again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—The clock strikes three⁠—a dismal knell!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then up along the town she hies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wonder if her senses fail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This piteous news so much it shocked her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She quite forgot to send the Doctor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To comfort poor old Susan Gale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now she’s high upon the down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she can see a mile of road;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh cruel! I’m almost threescore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such night as this was ne’er before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s not a single soul abroad.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She listens, but she cannot hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foot of horse, the voice of man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The streams with softest sound are flowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grass you almost hear it growing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You hear it now if e’er you can.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Owlets through the long blue night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are shouting to each other still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fond lovers! yet not quite hob nob,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They lengthen out the tremulous sob,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That echoes far from hill to hill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Poor Betty now has lost all hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her thoughts are bent on deadly sin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A green-grown pond she just has passed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the brink she hurries fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest she should drown herself therein.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now she sits her down and weeps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such tears she never shed before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh dear, dear Pony! my sweet joy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh carry back my Idiot Boy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we will ne’er o’erload thee more.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A thought is come into her head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The Pony he is mild and good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we have always used him well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps he’s gone along the dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carried Johnny to the wood.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then up she springs, as if on wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thinks no more of deadly sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Betty fifty ponds should see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last of all her thoughts would be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drown herself therein.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh Reader! now that I might tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Johnny and his Horse are doing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What they’ve been doing all this time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh could I put it into rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A most delightful tale pursuing!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps, and no unlikely thought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with his Pony now doth roam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cliffs and peaks so high that are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lay his hands upon a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his pocket bring it home.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps he’s turned himself about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His face unto his horse’s tail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still and mute, in wonder lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All like a silent Horseman-Ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He travels on along the vale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now, perhaps, he’s hunting sheep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fierce and dreadful hunter he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yon valley, that’s so trim and green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In five months’ time, should he be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A desart wilderness will be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps, with head and heels on fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like the very soul of evil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s galloping away, away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so he’ll gallop on for aye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bane of all that dread the devil.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I to the Muses have been bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These fourteen years, by strong indentures:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh gentle Muses! let me tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But half of what to him befel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He surely met with strange adventures.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh gentle Muses! is this kind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why will ye thus my suit repel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why of your further aid bereave me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And can ye thus unfriended leave me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye Muses! whom I love so well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who’s yon, that, near the waterfall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which thunders down with headlong force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the Moon, yet shining fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As careless as if nothing were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits upright on a feeding Horse?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto his Horse, that’s feeding free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seems, I think, the rein to give;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Moon or Stars he takes no heed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such we in romances read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—’Tis Johnny! Johnny! as I live.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that’s the very Pony too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is she, where is Betty Foy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hardly can sustain her fears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The roaring water-fall she hears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cannot find her Idiot Boy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Your Pony’s worth his weight in gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then calm your terrors, Betty Foy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’s coming from among the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now all full in view she sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Betty sees the Pony too:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why stand you thus, good Betty Foy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is no goblin, ’tis no ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis he whom you so long have lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He whom you love, your Idiot Boy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She looks again⁠—her arms are up⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She screams⁠—she cannot move for joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She darts, as with a torrent’s force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She almost has o’erturned the Horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fast she holds her Idiot Boy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Johnny burrs, and laughs aloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether in cunning or in joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot tell; but while he laughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betty a drunken pleasure quaffs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear again her Idiot Boy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now she’s at the Pony’s tail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now she’s at the Pony’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On that side now, and now on this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And almost stifled with her bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A few sad tears does Betty shed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She kisses o’er and o’er again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’s happy here, she’s happy there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is uneasy every where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her limbs are all alive with joy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She pats the Pony, where or when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She knows not, happy Betty Foy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little Pony glad may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he is milder far than she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You hardly can perceive his joy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh! Johnny, never mind the Doctor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ve done your best, and that is all.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took the reins, when this was said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gently turned the Pony’s head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the loud water-fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this the stars were almost gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon was setting on the hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pale you scarcely looked at her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little birds began to stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though yet their tongues were still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Pony, Betty, and her Boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wind slowly through the woody dale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who is she, be-times abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hobbles up the steep rough road?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is it, but old Susan Gale?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long Susan lay deep lost in thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many dreadful fears beset her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both for her Messenger and Nurse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as her mind grew worse and worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her body it grew better.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She turned, she tossed herself in bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On all sides doubts and terrors met her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Point after point did she discuss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while her mind was fighting thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her body still grew better.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Alas! what is become of them?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These fears can never be endured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll to the wood.”⁠—The word scarce said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did Susan rise up from her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if by magic cured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Away she posts up hill and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the wood at length is come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She spies her Friends, she shouts a greeting;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh me! it is a merry meeting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ever was in Christendom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Owls have hardly sung their last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While our four Travellers homeward wend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Owls have hooted all night long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the Owls began my song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the Owls must end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, while they all were travelling home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried Betty, “Tell us, Johnny, do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all this long night you have been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What you have heard, what you have seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, Johnny, mind you tell us true.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now Johnny all night long had heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Owls in tuneful concert strive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt too he the Moon had seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in the moonlight he had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From eight o’clock till five.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thus, to Betty’s question, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made answer, like a Traveller bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(His very words I give to you,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The Cocks did crow to-whoo, to-whoo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Sun did shine so cold.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Thus answered Johnny in his glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that was all his travel’s story.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">Love</h4>
				<p>
					<span>All Thoughts, all Passions, all Delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever stirs this mortal Frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All are but ministers of Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And feed his sacred flame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oft in my waking dreams do I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live o’er again that happy hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When midway on the Mount I lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beside the Ruined Tower.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Moonshine stealing o’er the scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had blended with the Lights of Eve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she was there, my Hope, my Joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My own dear Genevieve!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She leaned against the Armed Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Statue of the Armed Knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She stood and listened to my Harp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Amid the ling’ring Light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Few Sorrows hath she of her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Hope, my Joy, my Genevieve!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She loves me best, whene’er I sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Songs, that make her grieve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I played a soft and doleful Air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sang an old and moving Story⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An old rude Song that fitted well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Ruin wild and hoary.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She listened with a flitting Blush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With downcast Eyes and modest Grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well she knew, I could not choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But gaze upon her Face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I told her of the Knight, that wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his Shield a burning Brand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that for ten long Years he wooed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Lady of the Land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I told her, how he pin’d: and, ah!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The low, the deep, the pleading tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which I sang another’s Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Interpreted my own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She listened with a flitting Blush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With downcast Eyes and modest Grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she forgave me, that I gazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Too fondly on her Face!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when I told the cruel scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which crazed this bold and lovely Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that he crossed the mountain woods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor rested day nor night;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That sometimes from the savage Den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes from the darksome Shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes starting up at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In green and sunny Glade,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There came, and looked him in the face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An Angel beautiful and bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that he knew, it was a Fiend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This miserable Knight!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And how, unknowing what he did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leapt amid a murd’rous Band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saved from Outrage worse than Death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Lady of the Land;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And how she wept and clasped his knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how she tended him in vain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever strove to expiate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Scorn, that crazed his Brain:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that she nursed him in a Cave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how his Madness went away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When on the yellow forest leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A dying Man he lay;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His dying words⁠—But when I reached</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tenderest strain of all the Ditty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My falt’ring Voice and pausing Harp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Disturbed her Soul with Pity!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All Impulses of Soul and Sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had thrilled my guileless Genevieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Music, and the doleful Tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The rich and balmy Eve;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Hopes, and Fears that kindle Hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An undistinguishable Throng!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gentle Wishes long subdued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Subdued and cherished long!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She wept with pity and delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She blushed with love and maiden shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like the murmur of a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I heard her breathe my name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her bosom heaved⁠—she stepped aside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As conscious of my Look, she stepped⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then suddenly with timorous eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She fled to me and wept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She half enclosed me with her arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She pressed me with a meek embrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bending back her head looked up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And gazed upon my face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas partly Love, and partly Fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And partly ’twas a bashful Art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I might rather feel than see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Swelling of her Heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I calmed her fears; and she was calm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told her love with virgin Pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so I won my Genevieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My bright and beauteous Bride!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-mad-mother" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Mad Mother</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Her eyes are wild, her head is bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun has burnt her coal-black hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eye-brows have a rusty stain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she came far from over the main.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She has a baby on her arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else she were alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And underneath the hay-stack warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the green-wood stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She talked and sung the woods among;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it was in the English tongue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sweet Babe! they say that I am mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But nay, my heart is far too glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I am happy when I sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a sad and doleful thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, lovely Babe, do not fear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray thee have no fear of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, safe as in a cradle, here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lovely Baby! thou shalt be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee I know too much I owe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot work thee any woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A fire was once within my brain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my head a dull, dull pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fiendish faces one, two, three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung at my breasts, and pulled at me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then there came a sight of joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It came at once to do me good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I waked, and saw my little Boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little Boy of flesh and blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh joy for me that sight to see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was here, and only he.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Suck, little Babe, oh suck again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It cools my blood; it cools my brain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy lips I feel them, Baby! they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw from my heart the pain away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! press me with thy little hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It loosens something at my chest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About that tight and deadly band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel thy little fingers prest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breeze I see is in the tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It comes to cool my Babe and me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! love me, love me, little Boy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art thy Mother’s only joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do not dread the waves below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When o’er the sea-rock’s edge we go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The high crag cannot work me harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor leaping torrents when they howl;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Babe I carry on my arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saves for me my precious soul:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then happy lie, for blest am I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without me my sweet Babe would die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then do not fear, my Boy! for thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bold as a lion I will be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will always be thy guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through hollow snows and rivers wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll build an Indian bower; I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leaves that make the softest bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if from me thou wilt not go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still be true till I am dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pretty thing! then thou shalt sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As merry as the birds in spring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy Father cares not for my breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis thine, sweet Baby, there to rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis all thine own! and, if its hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be changed, that was so fair to view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis fair enough for thee, my dove!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My beauty, little Child, is flown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou wilt live with me in love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what if my poor cheek be brown?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis well for me, thou canst not see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How pale and wan it else would be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dread not their taunts, my little life!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am thy Father’s wedded Wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And underneath the spreading tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We two will live in honesty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If his sweet Boy he could forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With me he never would have stayed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From him no harm my Babe can take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he, poor Man! is wretched made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every day we two will pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him that’s gone and far away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I’ll teach my Boy the sweetest things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll teach him how the owlet sings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little Babe! thy lips are still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou hast almost sucked thy fill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Where art thou gone, my own dear Child?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wicked looks are those I see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! alas! that look so wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It never, never came from me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou art mad, my pretty lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I must be for ever sad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! smile on me, my little lamb!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I thy own dear Mother am.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love for thee has well been tried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve sought thy Father far and wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know the poisons of the shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know the earth-nuts fit for food;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, pretty dear, be not afraid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll find thy Father in the wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now laugh and be gay, to the woods away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, my babe, we’ll live for aye.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-ancient-mariner" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">
					<span>The Ancient Mariner</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A Poet’s Reverie</span>
				</h4>
				<section id="the-ancient-mariner-part-1" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h5>
					<p>
						<span>It is an ancient Mariner,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And he stoppeth one of three:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“By thy long gray beard and thy glittering eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Now wherefore stoppest me?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Bridegroom’s doors are opened wide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I am next of kin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Guests are met, the Feast is set⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">May’st hear the merry din.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But still he holds the wedding-guest⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">“There was a Ship,” quoth he⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Nay, if thou’st got a laughsome tale,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Mariner! come with me.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He holds him with his skinny hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Quoth he, “There was a Ship⁠—”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Now get thee hence, thou gray-beard Loon!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or my Staff shall make thee skip.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He holds him with his glittering eye⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The wedding-guest stood still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And listens like a three years’ child;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Mariner hath his will.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The wedding-guest sate on a stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He cannot choose but hear:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus spake on that ancient man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The bright-eyed Mariner.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“The Ship was cheered, the Harbour cleared⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Merrily did we drop</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Below the Kirk, below the Hill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Below the Light-house top.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Sun came up upon the left,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Out of the Sea came he:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he shone bright, and on the right</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Went down into the sea.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Higher and higher every day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till over the mast at noon⁠—”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wedding-guest here beat his breast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For he heard the loud bassoon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Bride hath paced into the Hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Red as a rose is she;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nodding their heads before her go</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The merry Minstrelsy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The wedding-guest he beat his breast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet he cannot choose but hear:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus spake on that ancient Man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The bright-eyed Mariner:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“But now the North wind came more fierce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There came a Tempest strong!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Southward still for days and weeks</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like Chaff we drove along.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And now there came both Mist and Snow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And it grew wondrous cold:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Ice mast-high came floating by</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As green as Emerald.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And through the drifts the snowy clifts</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Did send a dismal sheen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor shapes of men nor beasts we ken⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Ice was all between.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Ice was here, the Ice was there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Ice was all around:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It cracked and growled, and roared and howled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A wild and ceaseless sound.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>At length did cross an Albatross,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thorough the Fog it came;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if it had been a Christian Soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We hailed it in God’s name.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Mariners gave it biscuit-worms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And round and round it flew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Ice did split with a Thunder-fit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Helmsman steered us through.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And a good South wind sprung up behind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Albatross did follow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And every day for food or play</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Came to the Mariner’s hollo!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>In mist or cloud on mast or shroud</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It perched for vespers nine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whiles all the night through fog-smoke white</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Glimmered the white moon-shine.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“God save thee, antient Mariner!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From the fiends that plague thee thus!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why look’st thou so?”⁠—“With my cross bow</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I shot the Albatross.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-ancient-mariner-part-2" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h5>
					<p>
						<span>“The Sun now rose upon the right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Out of the Sea came he;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still hid in mist; and on the left</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Went down into the Sea.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And the good South wind still blew behind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But no sweet Bird did follow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor any day for food or play</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Came to the Mariner’s hollo!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And I had done an hellish thing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And it would work ’em woe:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For all averred, I had killed the Bird</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That made the Breeze to blow.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Nor dim nor red, like an Angel’s head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The glorious Sun uprist:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then all averred, I had killed the Bird</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That brought the fog and mist.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas right, said they, such birds to slay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That bring the fog and mist.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The breezes blew, the white foam flew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The furrow followed free:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We were the first that ever burst</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Into that silent Sea.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Down dropt the breeze, the Sails dropt down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Twas sad as sad could be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we did speak only to break</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The silence of the Sea.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>All in a hot and copper sky</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The bloody sun at noon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right up above the mast did stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No bigger than the moon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Day after day, day after day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We stuck, nor breath nor motion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As idle as a painted Ship</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Upon a painted Ocean.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Water, water, every where,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all the boards did shrink;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Water, water, every where,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor any drop to drink.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The very deeps did rot: O Christ!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That ever this should be!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yea, slimy things did crawl with legs</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Upon the slimy Sea.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>About, about, in reel and rout</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Death-fires danced at night;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The water, like a witch’s oils,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Burnt green and blue and white.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And some in dreams assured were</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of the Spirit that plagued us so:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nine fathom deep he had followed us</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From the Land of Mist and Snow.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And every tongue through utter drouth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Was withered at the root;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We could not speak no more than if</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We had been choked with soot.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Ah well-a-day! what evil looks</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had I from old and young!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instead of the Cross the Albatross</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">About my neck was hung.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-ancient-mariner-part-3" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h5>
					<p>
						<span>“So pass’d a weary time; each throat</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Was parched, and glazed each eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When, looking westward, I beheld</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A something in the sky.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>At first it seemed a little speck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And then it seemed a mist:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It moved and moved, and took at last</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A certain shape, I wist.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A speck, a mist, a shape, I wist!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And still it ner’d and ner’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as if it dodged a water-sprite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It plunged and tacked and veered.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>With throat unslaked, with black lips baked</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We could nor laugh nor wail;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through utter drouth all dumb we stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I bit my arm and sucked the blood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And cried, A sail! a sail!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>With throat unslaked, with black lips baked</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Agape they heard me call:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gramercy! they for joy did grin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all at once their breath drew in</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As they were drinking all.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>See! See! (I cried) she tacks no more!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Hither to work us weal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without a breeze, without a tide</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She steddies with upright keel!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The western wave was all a flame.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The day was well nigh done!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Almost upon the western wave</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Rested the broad bright Sun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that strange shape drove suddenly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Betwixt us and the Sun.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And straight the Sun was flecked with bars</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">(Heaven’s Mother send us grace!)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if through a dungeon grate he peered</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With broad and burning face.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Alas! (thought I, and my heart beat loud)</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How fast she neres and neres!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are those <em>her</em> Sails that glance in the Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like restless gossameres?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Are those <em>her</em> Ribs, through which the Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Did peer, as through a grate?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And are those two all, all her crew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That Woman, and her Mate?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><em>His</em> bones were black with many a crack,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All black and bare, I ween;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jet-black and bare, save where with rust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of mouldy damps and charnel crust</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They were patched with purple and green.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><em>Her</em> lips were red, <em>her</em> looks were free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1"><em>Her</em> locks were yellow as gold:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her skin was white as leprosy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she was far liker Death than he;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her flesh made the still air cold.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The naked Hulk alongside came</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the Twain were playing dice;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“The Game is done! I’ve won, I’ve won!”</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Quoth she, and whistled thrice.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A gust of wind sterte up behind</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And whistled through his bones;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thro’ the hole of his eyes and the hole of his mouth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Half-whistles and half-groans.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>With never a whisper in the Sea</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Off darts the Spectre-ship;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While clombe above the Eastern bar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The horned Moon, with one bright Star</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Almost between the tips.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>One after one by the horned Moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">(Listen, O Stranger! to me)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each turned his face with a ghastly pang</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And cursed me with his ee.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Four times fifty living men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With never a sigh or groan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With heavy thump, a lifeless lump</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They dropped down one by one.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Their souls did from their bodies fly⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They fled to bliss or woe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And every soul it passed me by,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like the whiz of my Cross-bow.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-ancient-mariner-part-4" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h5>
					<p>
						<span>“I fear thee, ancient Mariner!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I fear thy skinny hand;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou art long and lank and brown</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As is the ribbed Sea-sand.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I fear thee and thy glittering eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And thy skinny hand so brown”⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Fear not, fear not, thou wedding-guest!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This body dropt not down.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Alone, alone, all all alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Alone on the wide wide Sea;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Christ would take no pity on</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My soul in agony.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The many men so beautiful,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And they all dead did lie!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And a million million slimy things</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lived on⁠—and so did I.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I looked upon the rotting Sea,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And drew my eyes away;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I looked upon the ghastly deck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And there the dead men lay.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I looked to Heaven, and tried to pray;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But or ever a prayer had gusht,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A wicked whisper came and made</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My heart as dry as dust.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I closed my lids and kept them close,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till the balls like pulses beat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the sky and the sea, and the sea and the sky</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lay like a load on my weary eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the dead were at my feet.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The cold sweat melted from their limbs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor rot nor reek did they;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The look with which they looked on me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had never passed away.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>An orphan’s curse would drag to Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A spirit from on high:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But O! more horrible than that</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is the curse in a dead man’s eye!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seven days, seven nights I saw that curse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And yet I could not die.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The moving Moon went up the sky</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And no where did abide:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Softly she was going up</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a star or two beside⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Her beams bemocked the sultry main</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like April hoar-frost spread;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But where the Ship’s huge shadow lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The charmed water burnt alway</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A still and awful red.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Beyond the shadow of the ship</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I watched the water-snakes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They moved in tracks of shining white;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when they reared, the elfish light</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fell off in hoary flakes.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Within the shadow of the ship</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I watched their rich attire:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blue, glossy green, and velvet black</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They coiled and swam; and every track</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Was a flash of golden fire.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O happy living things! no tongue</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Their beauty might declare:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A spring of love gusht from my heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I blessed them unaware!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sure my kind saint took pity on me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I blessed them unaware.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The self-same moment I could pray;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And from my neck so free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Albatross fell off, and sank</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like lead into the sea.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-ancient-mariner-part-5" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h5>
					<p>
						<span>“O sleep, it is a gentle thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Beloved from pole to pole!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Mary-queen the praise be given,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She sent the gentle sleep from heaven</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That slid into my soul.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The silly buckets on the deck</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That had so long remained,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I dreamt that they were filled with dew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And when I awoke it rained.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>My lips were wet, my throat was cold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My garments all were dank;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sure I had drunken in my dreams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And still my body drank.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I moved and could not feel my limbs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I was so light, almost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I thought that I had died in sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And was a blessed Ghost.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And soon I heard a roaring wind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It did not come anear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But with its sound it shook the sails</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That were so thin and sere.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The upper air burst into life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a hundred fire-flags sheen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To and fro they were hurried about;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to and fro, and in and out</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The wan stars danced between.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And the coming wind did roar more loud;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the sails did sigh like sedge:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the rain poured down from one black cloud</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The moon was at its edge.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The thick black cloud was cleft, and still</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Moon was at its side:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like waters shot from some high crag,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lightning fell with never a jag</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A river steep and wide.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The loud wind never reached the Ship,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet now the Ship moved on!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath the lightning and the moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The dead men gave a groan.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>They groaned, they stirred, they all uprose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor spake, nor moved their eyes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It had been strange, even in a dream</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To have seen those dead men rise.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The helmsman steered, the ship moved on;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet never a breeze up-blew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Mariners all ’gan work the ropes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where they were wont to do:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They raised their limbs like lifeless tools⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We were a ghastly crew.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The body of my brother’s son</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Stood by me knee to knee:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The body and I pulled at one rope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But he said nought to me.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I fear thee, ancient Mariner!”</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">“Be calm, thou wedding-guest!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas not those souls, that fled in pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which to their corses came again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But a troop of Spirits blest:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For when it dawned⁠—they dropped their arms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And clustered round the mast:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweet sounds rose slowly through their mouths,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And from their bodies passed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Around, around, flew each sweet sound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then darted to the sun:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slowly the sounds came back again</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Now mixed, now one by one.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Sometimes a-dropping from the sky</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I heard the Sky-lark sing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sometimes all little birds that are</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How they seemed to fill the sea and air</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With their sweet jargoning!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And now ’twas like all instruments,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Now like a lonely flute:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now it is an angel’s song</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That makes the heavens be mute.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It ceased: yet still the sails made on</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A pleasant noise till noon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A noise like of a hidden brook</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the leafy month of June,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to the sleeping woods all night</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Singeth a quiet tune.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Till noon we silently sailed on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet never a breeze did breathe:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slowly and smoothly went the Ship</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Moved onward from beneath.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Under the keel nine fathom deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From the land of mist and snow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Spirit slid: and it was He</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That made the Ship to go.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sails at noon left off their tune,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the Ship stood still also.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The sun right up above the mast</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had fixed her to the ocean:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in a minute she ’gan stir</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With a short uneasy motion⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Backwards and forwards half her length,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With a short uneasy motion.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Then, like a pawing horse let go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She made a sudden bound:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It flung the blood into my head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I fell into a swound.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>How long in that same fit I lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I have not to declare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ere my living life returned,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I heard and in my soul discerned</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Two voices in the air.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>‘Is it he?’ quoth one, ‘Is this the man?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By him who died on cross,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With his cruel bow he laid full low</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The harmless Albatross.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Spirit who bideth by himself</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the land of mist and snow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He loved the bird that loved the man</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who shot him with his bow.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The other was a softer voice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As soft as honey-dew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth he, ‘The man hath penance done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And penance more will do.’</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-ancient-mariner-part-6" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h5>
					<p class="voice">
						<span>First Voice</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“ ‘But tell me, tell me! speak again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thy soft response renewing⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What makes that ship drive on so fast?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">What is the Ocean doing?’</span>
					</p>
					<p class="voice">
						<span>Second Voice</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>‘Still as a Slave before his Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Ocean hath no blast:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His great bright eye most silently</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Up to the moon is cast⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>If he may know which way to go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For she guides him smooth or grim.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See, brother, see! how graciously</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She looketh down on him.’</span>
					</p>
					<p class="voice">
						<span>First Voice</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>‘But why drives on that ship so fast</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Without or wave or wind?’</span>
					</p>
					<p class="voice">
						<span>Second Voice</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>‘The air is cut away before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And closes from behind.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Fly, brother, fly! more high, more high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or we shall be belated:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For slow and slow that ship will go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">When the Mariner’s trance is abated.’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I woke, and we were sailing on</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As in a gentle weather:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas night, calm night, the moon was high;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The dead men stood together.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>All stood together on the deck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For a charnel-dungeon fitter:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All fixed on me their stony eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That in the moon did glitter.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The pang, the curse, with which they died,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had never passed away;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I could not draw my eyes from theirs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor turn them up to pray.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And now this spell was snapt: once more</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I viewed the ocean green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And looked far forth, yet little saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of what had else been seen⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Like one, that on a lonesome road</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth walk in fear and dread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And having once turned round, walks on</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And turns no more his head;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because he knows, a frightful fiend</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth close behind him tread.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But soon there breathed a wind on me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor sound nor motion made:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its path was not upon the sea</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In ripple or in shade.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It raised my hair, it fanned my cheek,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like a meadow-gale of spring⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It mingled strangely with my fears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet it felt like a welcoming.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Swiftly, swiftly flew the ship,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet she sailed softly too:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweetly, sweetly blew the breeze⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">On me alone it blew.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O dream of joy! is this indeed</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The light-house top I see?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is this the Hill? Is this the Kirk?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is this mine own countrée?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>We drifted o’er the Harbour-bar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I with sobs did pray⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘O let me be awake, my God!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or let me sleep alway!’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The harbour-bay was clear as glass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">So smoothly it was strewn!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on the bay the moonlight lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the shadow of the moon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The rock shone bright, the kirk no less</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That stands above the rock:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The moonlight steeped in silentness</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The steady weathercock.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And the bay was white with silent light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till rising from the same</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full many shapes, that shadows were,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In crimson colours came.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A little distance from the prow</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Those crimson shadows were:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I turned my eyes upon the deck⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O Christ! what saw I there?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Each corse lay flat, lifeless and flat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And by the Holy rood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A man all light, a seraph-man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">On every corse there stood.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This seraph-band, each waved his hand:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It was a heavenly sight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They stood as signals to the land,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Each one a lovely light:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This seraph-band, each waved his hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No voice did they impart⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No voice; but O! the silence sank</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like music on my heart.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But soon I heard the dash of oars,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I heard the pilot’s cheer:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My head was turned perforce away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I saw a boat appear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The pilot, and the pilot’s boy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I heard them coming fast:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dear Lord in Heaven! it was a joy</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The dead men could not blast.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I saw a third⁠—I heard his voice:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It is the Hermit good!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He singeth loud his godly hymns</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That he makes in the wood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He’ll shrieve my soul, he’ll wash away</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Albatross’s blood.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-ancient-mariner-part-7" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h5 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h5>
					<p>
						<span>“This Hermit good lives in that wood</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which slopes down to the Sea.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How loudly his sweet voice he rears!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He loves to talk with Mariners</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That come from a far countrée.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He kneels at morn and noon and eve⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He hath a cushion plump:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is the moss that wholly hides</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The rotted old Oak-stump.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Skiff-boat ner’d: I heard them talk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">‘Why, this is strange, I trow!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where are those lights so many and fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That signal made but now?’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>‘Strange, by my faith!’ the Hermit said⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">‘And they answered not our cheer.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The planks look warped, and see those sails</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How thin they are and sere!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never saw aught like to them</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Unless perchance it were</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The skeletons of leaves that lag</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My forest brook along:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the Ivy-tod is heavy with snow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the Owlet whoops to the wolf below</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That eats the she-wolf’s young.’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>‘Dear Lord! it has a fiendish look⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">(The pilot made reply)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am a-feared.’⁠—‘Push on, push on!’</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Said the Hermit cheerily.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Boat came closer to the Ship,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But I nor spake nor stirred:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Boat came close beneath the Ship,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And straight a sound was heard.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Under the water it rumbled on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Still louder and more dread:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It reached the ship, it split the bay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The ship went down like lead.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Stunned by that loud and dreadful sound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which sky and ocean smote,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like one that hath been seven days drowned</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My body lay afloat:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But, swift as dreams, myself I found</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Within the Pilot’s boat.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Upon the whirl, where sank the Ship,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The boat spun round and round,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all was still, save that the hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Was telling of the sound.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I moved my lips: the Pilot shrieked</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And fell down in a fit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Holy Hermit raised his eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And prayed where he did sit.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I took the oars: the Pilot’s boy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who now doth crazy go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laughed loud and long, and all the while</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His eyes went to and fro,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Ha! ha!’ quoth he⁠—‘full plain I see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The devil knows how to row.’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And now all in mine own countrée</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I stood on the firm land!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Hermit stepped forth from the boat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And scarcely he could stand.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>‘O shrieve me, shrieve me, holy Man!’</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Hermit crossed his brow.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Say quick,’ quoth he, ‘I bid thee say</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">What manner man art thou?’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Forthwith this frame of mind was wrenched</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With a woeful agony,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which forced me to begin my tale,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And then it left me free.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Since then, at an uncertain hour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That agony returns;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And till my ghastly tale is told</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This heart within me burns.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I pass, like night, from land to land;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I have strange power of speech;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The moment that his face I see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I know the man that must hear me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To him my tale I teach.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>What loud uproar bursts from that door!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The wedding-guests are there;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in the garden-bower the bride</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And bride-maids singing are;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hark the little vesper-bell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which biddeth me to prayer.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O wedding-guest! this soul hath been</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Alone on a wide wide sea:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So lonely ’twas, that God himself</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Scarce seemed there to be.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O sweeter than the marriage-feast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Tis sweeter far to me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To walk together to the Kirk</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With a goodly company:⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To walk together to the Kirk</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all together pray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While each to his great Father bends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Old men, and babes, and loving friends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And youths, and maidens gay.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Farewell, farewell! But this I tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To thee, thou wedding-guest!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He prayeth well who loveth well</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Both man and bird and beast.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He prayeth best who loveth best</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All things both great and small:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the dear God, who loveth us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He made and loveth all.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Mariner, whose eye is bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whose beard with age is hoar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is gone; and now the wedding-guest</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Turned from the bridegroom’s door.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He went, like one that hath been stunned</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And is of sense forlorn:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sadder and a wiser man</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He rose the morrow morn.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="tintern-abbey" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">Lines Written a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey, on Revisiting the Banks of the Wye During a Tour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></h4>
				<p>
					<span>Five years have passed; five summers, with the length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of five long winters! and again I hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a sweet inland murmur.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a>⁠—Once again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which on a wild secluded scene impress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoughts of more deep seclusion; and connect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The landscape with the quiet of the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day is come when I again repose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, under this dark sycamore, and view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These plots of cottage-ground, these orchard-tufts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, at this season, with their unripe fruits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are clad in one green hue, and lose themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the woods and copses, nor disturb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wild green landscape. Once again I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These hedge-rows, hardly hedge-rows, little lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sportive wood run wild; these pastoral farms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green to the very door; and wreaths of smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent up, in silence, from among the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With some uncertain notice, as might seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vagrant Dwellers in the houseless woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or of some Hermit’s cave, where by his fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Hermit sits alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Though absent long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These forms of beauty have not been to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is a landscape to a blind man’s eye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oft, in lonely rooms, and mid the din</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of towns and cities, I have owed to them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hours of weariness, sensations sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And passing even into my purer mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tranquil restoration:⁠—feelings too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of unremembered pleasure: such, perhaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As may have had no trivial influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On that best portion of a good man’s life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His little, nameless, unremembered acts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them I may have owed another gift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which the burthen of the mystery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which the heavy and the weary weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all this unintelligible world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is lightened:⁠—that serene and blessed mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which the affections gently lead us on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until, the breath of this corporeal frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even the motion of our human blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost suspended, we are laid asleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In body, and become a living soul:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While with an eye made quiet by the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of harmony, and the deep power of joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We see into the life of things.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">If this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be but a vain belief, yet, oh! how oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In darkness, and amid the many shapes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joyless day-light; when the fretful stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unprofitable, and the fever of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have hung upon the beatings of my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O sylvan Wye! Thou wanderer thro’ the woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How often has my spirit turned to thee!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now, with gleams of half-extinguished thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many recognitions dim and faint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And somewhat of a sad perplexity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The picture of the mind revives again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While here I stand, not only with the sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in this moment there is life and food</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For future years. And so I dare to hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though changed, no doubt, from what I was, when first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I came among these hills; when like a roe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bounded o’er the mountains, by the sides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherever nature led: more like a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flying from something that he dreads, than one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their glad animal movements all gone by,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me was all in all⁠—I cannot paint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What then I was. The sounding cataract</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their colours and their forms, were then to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An appetite: a feeling and a love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had no need of a remoter charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thought supplied, or any interest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unborrowed from the eye.⁠—That time is past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its aching joys are now no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur; other gifts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have followed, for such loss, I would believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abundant recompense. For I have learned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look on nature, not as in the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thoughtless youth, but hearing oftentimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The still, sad music of humanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To chasten and subdue. And I have felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A presence that disturbs me with the joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of something far more deeply interfused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the round ocean and the living air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the blue sky, and in the mind of man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A motion and a spirit, that impels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All thinking things, all objects of all thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lover of the meadows and the woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mountains; and of all that we behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this green earth; of all the mighty world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of eye and ear, both what they half create,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what perceive; well pleased to recognize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In nature and the language of the sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all my moral being.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Nor, perchance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I were not thus taught, should I the more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffer my genial spirits to decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou art with me, here, upon the banks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this fair river; thou, my dearest Friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dear, dear Friend, and in thy voice I catch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The language of my former heart, and read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My former pleasures in the shooting lights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy wild eyes. Oh! yet a little while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May I behold in thee what I was once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dear, dear Sister! And this prayer I make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing that Nature never did betray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heart that loved her; ’tis her privilege,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the years of this our life, to lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From joy to joy: for she can so inform</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mind that is within us, so impress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quietness and beauty, and so feed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dreary intercourse of daily life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall e’er prevail against us, or disturb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our cheerful faith that all which we behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shine on thee in thy solitary walk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the misty mountain winds be free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blow against thee: and, in after years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When these wild ecstasies shall be matured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a sober pleasure, when thy mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy memory be as a dwelling-place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all sweet sounds and harmonies; Oh! then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tender joy wilt thou remember me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these my exhortations! Nor, perchance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I should be where I no more can hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of past existence, wilt thou then forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on the banks of this delightful stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We stood together; and that I, so long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A worshipper of Nature, hither came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwearied in that service: rather say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With warmer love, oh! with far deeper zeal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of holier love. Nor wilt thou then forget,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That after many wanderings, many years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of absence, these steep woods and lofty cliffs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this green pastoral landscape, were to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More dear, both for themselves and for thy sake.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
